# The Story of the Creation of Everything

This story had been passed down as an Oral Tradition for many generations. The great bard Farthyer wrote down the tradition in Common so that all could know how things came to be.

## Darkness and the Beginning

In the beginning, there was Darkness. The Darkness wrapped itself around and as it wrapped, it tangled and knotted. The knots and tangles knotted and tangled themselves and slowly, a being formed. This being, the first thing, was called Ith.

Ith became from Darkness, and from Darkness, Ith came to be.

The Darkness was very tangled and knotted, and Ith thought that this was not good, so Ith took the Darkness and untied the knots and straightened the tangles. After twelve days, Ith has straightened the Darkness, and so the Darkness was at it had been before Ith. Ith thought that should the Darkness tangle itself again, it would take twelve more days to straighten. Ith decided to count the days by twelve, so Ith would know how much longer it would take to untangle the Darkness, but Ith did not want to count alone, as it would take time to mark the days and therefore add time needed to straighten the Darkness, so Ith decided to let the Darkness be and see what woud happen. As before, the darkness wrapped itself around and tangled and knotted. The knots and tangles tangled and knotted, and another being formed. This being, the second thing, was called Ool.

Ool became from Darkness, and from Darkness, Ool came to be.

Ool and Ith began to straighten the Darkness. Ith would straighten and Ool would count. After 12 days, the Darkness was again as it was, and Ith and Ool were happy. Satisfied with their work, Ith and Ool set off to see what there was to see. But they could not see far as Darkness enveloped everything, so Ith and Ool decided to make something to help see. Ith took many parts of the Darkness, held them close, and threw them out, creating the stars. Ool found a large knot of Darkess, breathed on it, and made the Sun, Io. Io shined brighter than all the stars together, but as Ith, Ool, and Io walked, Io grew tired, and needed to rest. As Io rested, the light from Io turned to darkness, and the stars were the only light. Ith and Ool decided that this could not be, as they could not see far enough with the light from the stars, so Ith found another knot of Darkness, breathed on it, and made the Moon, Oi. Oi was smaller than Io, but was still brighter than the stars, so as Io rested, Oi shined. Ith and Ool thought that Io and Oi might fight, as Io might say "I was created by Ool, I was fashioned from the bigger knot, you must listen to me", and Oi might say "I was created by Ith, and I was created because of you. As you rested, I was created, so you must listen to me". Ith and Ool decided that it would be best if Io and Oi never met so that they could not fight, and so as Io rested, Oi lit the way. And as Oi rested, Io lit the way. And it was good.

After 12 days had been counted 3 times, Ith and Ool decided to return to where they had come from, as surely the Darkness must have knotted and tangled. They returned with Io and Oi, and found a knot had been formed. This knot was larger than the knot Oi was formed from. It was larger than the knot that Io was formed from. It was larger than the knots that formed Ool and the knots that formed Ith. But nothing had come from this knot. Ith turned to Ool and said "I had come from knots, you had come from knots, surely something must have come from this knot". So Ith took Oi and set off around the knot to see what had come from the knot. Once Ith and Oi were gone for half a day, Ool and Io set off as well to see if they too could find what had come from the knot. For 12 days, Ith and Ool walked around the knot to find what had come from it. After 12 days, Ith and Ool could not find what had come from the knot. So Ith and Ool took the knot, and it was heavy. With all the strength they had, they lifted the knot. With all the breath they had, they breathed on the knot, and with all they had come to know, they gave to the knot. And the knot became Tilo, and Ith and Ool disappeared.

Tilo became from Ith and Ool, and from Ith and Ool, Tilo came to be.

## Io, Oi, and Tilo
